README.md, before:

# Nix Derivations and OS configurations

Collection of system configurations and derivations for packages not found in
[Nixpkgs](https://search.nixos.org), accessible via a [Nix flake](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Flakes).

## Derivations

### FlakeTeX

A script to compile a LaTeX project via `pdflatex` provided by [TeX Live](https://tug.org/texlive/).

```sh
nix run github:hfxbse/nixos-config#flaketex
```

Parameters to the script can be pass after a `--` as typical for flakes.
Here is an example which will display the script help.

```sh
# everything after the `--` will be passed to the script
nix run github:hfxbse/nixos-config#flaketex -- -h
```

### Nixvim

Neovim configuration on all host machines implemented using
[NixVim](https://github.com/nix-community/nixvim).
Can be run as a standalone program, no dependency on NixOS, though
[Nerd Fonts](https://www.nerdfonts.com/) is needed to display icons correctly.

### Quick template

Wrapper around `nix flake init` to avoid having to type long URLs manually.

## Templates

### Baseline flake template

* `.editorconfig` for `.nix` files and enforcing a new line at the end of all files.
* GitHub Workflow to check the validity of the flake.
* `system` helper function only using `nixpkgs.lib.genAttrs`.
* `.gitignore` excluding build output from Nix.

To utilize this template run

```sh
nix flake init -t github:hfxbse/nixos-config
```

## Host configurations

### Bootstrapping

1. Disable secure boot in the BIOS of your computer and set it into setup mode.
2. Format the disk from the installer via [disko](https://github.com/nix-community/disko):
   ```sh
   sudo nix --experimental-features "nix-command flakes" \
       run github:nix-community/disko/latest -- \
       --mode destroy,format,mount \
       disk-config.nix
   ```
3. Install NixOS from the configuration flake:
   ```sh
   sudo nixos-install --flake .
   ```
   ⚠️ Secure boot needs to be disabled in the configuration at this point ⚠️
4. Enter the installation via `nixos-enter` and set the password of the normal
   users.
5. Boot into the new NixOS installation
6. Generate secure boot platform keys and enroll them:
   ```sh
   nix run nixpkgs#sbctl -- create-keys
   nix run nixpkgs#sbctl -- enroll-keys
   ```
   ⚠️ Omitting Microsoft's platform keys might brick your system ⚠️
   This has not been an issue on a _Lenovo ThinkPad X12 gen 1._
7. Enabled secure boot within the BIOS of your computer.
8. Setup automatic unlocking of the LUKS's encryption via TPM:
   ```sh
   sudo systemd-cryptenroll --tpm2-device auto --tpm2-pcrs=0+2+7+12 --wipe-slot=tpm2 /dev/X
   ```

### ISO

Minimal live system to create a bootable ISO from with Nix flakes enabled by
default as well as other quality of live improvements for a headless installation.

A parameterized build is possible using the non-flake CLI, for example setting
up an authorized key for an SSH connection can be accomplished via

```sh
nix-build iso.nix --argstr authorizedKey "$(cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub)"
```

### CGI WSL

WSL2 configuration using [NixOS-WSL](https://github.com/nix-community/NixOS-WSL).

Build an installation file via

```sh
sudo nix run .#nixosConfigurations.cgi-wsl.config.system.build.tarballBuilder
```

Commit message:

Reinitialize server configuration as snowman

README.md, after:

# Nix Derivations and OS configurations

Collection of system configurations and derivations for packages not found in
[Nixpkgs](https://search.nixos.org), accessible via a [Nix flake](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Flakes).

## Derivations

### FlakeTeX

A script to compile a LaTeX project via `pdflatex` provided by [TeX Live](https://tug.org/texlive/).

```sh
nix run github:hfxbse/nixos-config#flaketex
```

Parameters to the script can be pass after a `--` as typical for flakes.
Here is an example which will display the script help.

```sh
# everything after the `--` will be passed to the script
nix run github:hfxbse/nixos-config#flaketex -- -h
```

### Nixvim

Neovim configuration on all host machines implemented using
[NixVim](https://github.com/nix-community/nixvim).
Can be run as a standalone program, no dependency on NixOS, though
[Nerd Fonts](https://www.nerdfonts.com/) is needed to display icons correctly.

### Quick template

Wrapper around `nix flake init` to avoid having to type long URLs manually.

## Templates

### Baseline flake template

* `.editorconfig` for `.nix` files and enforcing a new line at the end of all files.
* GitHub Workflow to check the validity of the flake.
* `system` helper function only using `nixpkgs.lib.genAttrs`.
* `.gitignore` excluding build output from Nix.

To utilize this template run

```sh
nix flake init -t github:hfxbse/nixos-config
```

## Host configurations

### Bootstrapping desktops and laptops

1. Disable secure boot in the BIOS of your computer and set it into setup mode.
2. Format the disk from the installer via [disko](https://github.com/nix-community/disko):
   ```sh
   sudo nix --experimental-features "nix-command flakes" \
       run github:nix-community/disko/latest -- \
       --mode destroy,format,mount \
       disk-config.nix
   ```
3. Install NixOS from the configuration flake:
   ```sh
   sudo nixos-install --flake .
   ```
   ⚠️ Secure boot needs to be disabled in the configuration at this point ⚠️
4. Enter the installation via `nixos-enter` and set the password of the normal
   users.
5. Boot into the new NixOS installation
6. Generate secure boot platform keys and enroll them:
   ```sh
   nix run nixpkgs#sbctl -- create-keys
   nix run nixpkgs#sbctl -- enroll-keys
   ```
   ⚠️ Omitting Microsoft's platform keys might brick your system ⚠️
   This has not been an issue on a _Lenovo ThinkPad X12 gen 1._
7. Enabled secure boot within the BIOS of your computer.
8. Setup automatic unlocking of the LUKS's encryption via TPM:
   ```sh
   sudo systemd-cryptenroll --tpm2-device auto --tpm2-pcrs=0+2+7+12 --wipe-slot=tpm2 /dev/X
   ```

### Bootstrapping the server

1. Create a file on your local machine at `/tmp/disk.key` containing the
   LUKS password.
2. Populate the `host/snowman/setup-keys` directory with the `authorized_keys`
   files.
   You need this to access the server after the install as no initial password
   is set.
3. Disable secure boot in the server configuration.
   Secure boot can only be configuration after the initial installation.
   See the guide for desktop machines and laptops for more information.
4. Run [nixos-anywhere](https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-anywhere) to
   install the NixOS configuration
   ```sh
    nix run github:nix-community/nixos-anywhere -- \
        --flake .#snowman \
        --no-substitute-on-destination \
        --target-host <user>@<host> \
        --disk-encryption-keys /tmp/disk.key /tmp/disk.key \
        --extra-files hosts/snowman/setup-keys/
   ```

### ISO

Minimal live system to create a bootable ISO from with Nix flakes enabled by
default as well as other quality of live improvements for a headless installation.

A parameterized build is possible using the non-flake CLI, for example setting
up an authorized key for an SSH connection can be accomplished via

```sh
nix-build iso.nix --argstr authorizedKey "$(cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub)"
```

### CGI WSL

WSL2 configuration using [NixOS-WSL](https://github.com/nix-community/NixOS-WSL).

Build an installation file via

```sh
sudo nix run .#nixosConfigurations.cgi-wsl.config.system.build.tarballBuilder
```
